README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

<br> <br>

# ConversationAlign

Open-source software for computing main effects and indices of alignment
across coversation partners in dyadic conversation transcripts. <br>

<div style="display: flex; gap: 10px; flex-wrap: wrap; margin-bottom: 15px;">

[![GitHub
release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign?color=blue&include_prereleases&label=Release)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/releases)
[![GitHub
stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign?style=social)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/stargazers)

[![Maintenance](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/graphs/commit-activity)
[![License: GPL
v3+](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL%20v3+-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)

</div>

<img src="man/figures/convo_demo.jpg" 
     alt="illustration of processing pipeline used by ConversationAlign" 
     style="float: right; width: 50%; margin-left: 20px; margin-bottom: 10px;" />

# Overview

`ConversationAlign` analyzes alignment and computes main effects across
more than 40 unique dimensions between interlocutors (conversation
partners) engaged in two-person conversations. ConversationAlign
transforms raw language data into simultaneous time series objects
across \>40 possible dimensions via an embedded lookup database. There
are a number of issues you should consider and steps you should take to
prepare your data. <br> <br>

# Installation

Install the development version of ConversationAlign from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) using the `devtools` package.

``` r
# Check if devtools is installed, if not install it
if (!require("devtools", quietly = TRUE)) {
  install.packages("devtools")
}

# Load devtools
library(devtools)

# Check if ConversationAlign is installed, if not install from GitHub
if (!require("ConversationAlign", quietly = TRUE)) {
  devtools::install_github("Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign")
}

# Load SemanticDistance
library(ConversationAlign)
```

# Step 1: Read and Format Transcript Options

## `read_dyads()`

- Reads transcripts from a local drive or directory of your choice.
- Store each of your individual conversation transcripts (`.csv`,
  `.txt`, `.ai`) that you wish to concatenate into a corpus in a folder.
  `ConversationAlign` will search for a folder called `my_transcripts`
  in the same directory as your script. However, feel free to name your
  folder anything you like. You can specify a custom path as an argument
  to `read_dyads()`
- Each transcript must nominally contain two columns of data
  (Participant and Text). All other columns (e.g., meta-data) will be
  retained.

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `read_dyads`:</span> <br>

- `my_path` default is ‘my_transcripts’, change path to your folder
  name<br>

``` r
#will search for folder 'my_transcripts' in your current directory
MyConvos <- read_dyads()

#will scan custom folder called 'MyStuff' in your current directory, concatenating all files in that folder into a single dataframe
MyConvos2 <- read_dyads(my_path='/MyStuff')
```

<br>

## `read_1file()`

- Read single transcript already in R environment. We will use
  read_1file() to prep the Marc Maron and Terry Gross transcript. Look
  at how the column headers have changed and the object name
  (MaronGross_2013) is now the Event_ID (a document identifier), <br>

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `read_1file`:</span> <br>

- `my_dat` object already in your R environment containing text and
  speaker information.

``` r
MaryLittleLamb <- read_1file(MaronGross_2013)
#print first ten rows of header
knitr::kable(head(MaronGross_2013, 10), format = "pipe")
```

| speaker | text |
|:---|:---|
| MARON | I’m a little nervous but I’ve prepared I’ve written things on a piece of paper |
| MARON | I don’t know how you prepare I could ask you that - maybe I will But this is how I prepare - I panic |
| MARON | For a while |
| GROSS | Yeah |
| MARON | And then I scramble and then I type some things up and then I handwrite things that are hard to read So I can you know challenge myself on that level during the interview |
| GROSS | Being self-defeating is always a good part of preparation |
| MARON | What is? |
| GROSS | Being self-defeating |
| MARON | Yes |
| GROSS | Self-sabotage |

<br> <br>

# Step 2: Clean, Format, Align Norms

## `prep_dyads()`

-Cleans, formats, and vectorizes conversation transwcripts to a
one-word-per-row format -Yokes psycholinguistic norms for up to three
dimensions at a time (from \<40 possible dimensions) to each content
word. -Retains metadata

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `prep_dyads()`:</span> <br>

- `dat_read` name of the dataframe created during `read_dyads()` <br>
- `omit_stops` T/F (default=T) option to remove stopwords
- `lemmatize` T/F (default=T) lemmatize strings converting each entry to
  its dictionary form
- `which_stoplist` quoted argument specifying stopword list to apply,
  options include `none`, `MIT_stops`, `SMART`, `CA_OriginalStops`, or
  `Temple_stops25`. Default is `Temple_stops25`.

``` r
NurseryRhymes_Prepped <- prep_dyads(dat_read=NurseryRhymes, lemmatize=TRUE, omit_stops=T, which_stoplist="Temple_stops25")
```

Example of a prepped dataset embedded as external data in the package
with ‘anger’ values yoked to each word.

``` r
knitr::kable(head(NurseryRhymes_Prepped, 10), format = "simple", digits=2)
```

| Event_ID | Participant_ID | Exchange_Count | Turn_Count | Text_Prep | Text_Clean | emo_anger |
|:---|:---|---:|---:|:---|:---|---:|
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | the | NA | NA |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | itsy | itsy | -0.02 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | bitsy | bitsy | -0.02 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | spider | spider | 0.04 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | climbed | climb | -0.09 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | up | up | -0.06 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | the | NA | NA |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | water | water | -0.17 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | spout | spout | 0.05 |
| ItsySpider | Maya | 1 | 2 | down | down | 0.03 |

<br> <br>

# Step 3: Summarize Data, Alignment Stats

## `summarize_dyads()`

This is the computational stage where the package generates a dataframe
boiled down to two rows per converation with summary data appended to
each level of Participant_ID. This returns the difference time series
AUC (dAUC) for every variable of interest you specified and the
correlation at lags -2,,0, 2. You decide whether you want a Pearson or
Spearman lagged correlation. <br>

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `summarize_dyads()`:</span> <br>

- `df_prep` dataframe created by `prep_dyads()` function
- `custom_lags` user specifies a custom set of turn-lags. Default is
  NULL with `ConversationAlign` producing correlations at a lead of 2
  turns, immediate response, and lag of 2 turns for each dimension of
  interest. <br>
- `sumdat_only` default is TRUE, produces grouped summary dataframe with
  averages by conversation and participant for each alignment dimension,
  FALSE retrains all of the original rows, filling down empty rows of
  summary statistics for the conversation (e.g., AUC)
- `corr_type` specifies correlation madel (parametric default =
  ‘Pearson’); other option ‘Spearman’ for computing turn-by-turn
  correlations across interlocutors for each dimension of interest.

``` r
MarySumDat <- summarize_dyads(df_prep = NurseryRhymes_Prepped, custom_lags=NULL, sumdat_only = TRUE, corr_type='Pearson') 
colnames(MarySumDat)
#>  [1] "Event_ID"           "Participant_ID"     "Dimension"         
#>  [4] "Dimension_Mean"     "AUC_raw"            "AUC_scaled100"     
#>  [7] "Talked_First"       "TurnCorr_Lead2"     "TurnCorr_Immediate"
#> [10] "TurnCorr_Lag2"
knitr::kable(head(MarySumDat, 10), format = "simple", digits = 3)
```

| Event_ID | Participant_ID | Dimension | Dimension_Mean | AUC_raw | AUC_scaled100 | Talked_First | TurnCorr_Lead2 | TurnCorr_Immediate | TurnCorr_Lag2 |
|:---|:---|:---|---:|---:|---:|:---|---:|---:|---:|
| ItsySpider | Maya | emo_anger | 0.001 | 0.783 | 1.630 | Maya | -1 | -1 | -1 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | emo_anger | -0.033 | 0.783 | 1.630 | Maya | -1 | -1 | -1 |
| JackJill | Ana | emo_anger | -0.066 | 3.729 | 4.662 | Ana | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| JackJill | Franklin | emo_anger | 0.030 | 3.729 | 4.662 | Ana | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| LittleLamb | Dave | emo_anger | -0.001 | 1.486 | 1.486 | Dave | NA | NA | NA |
| LittleLamb | Mary | emo_anger | -0.031 | 1.486 | 1.486 | Dave | NA | NA | NA |

# Optional: Generate corpus analytics

## `corpus_analytics()`

It is often critical to produce descriptives/summary statistics to
characterize your language sample. This is typically a laborious
process. `corpus_analytics` will do it for you, generating a near
publication ready table of analytics that you can easily export to the
specific journal format of your choice using any number of packages such
as `flextable` or `tinytable`.

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `corpus_analytics()`:</span>

- `dat_prep` dataframe created by `prep_dyads()`function <br>

``` r
NurseryRhymes_Analytics <-  corpus_analytics(dat_prep=NurseryRhymes_Prepped)
knitr::kable(head(NurseryRhymes_Analytics, 10), format = "simple", digits = 2)
```

| measure                                       |    mean | stdev |    min |    max |
|:----------------------------------------------|--------:|------:|-------:|-------:|
| total number of conversations                 |    3.00 |    NA |     NA |     NA |
| token count all conversations (raw)           | 1506.00 |    NA |     NA |     NA |
| token count all conversations (post-cleaning) | 1032.00 |    NA |     NA |     NA |
| exchange count (by conversation)              |   38.00 | 13.11 |  24.00 |  50.00 |
| word count raw (by conversation)              |  502.00 | 47.03 | 456.00 | 550.00 |
| word count clean (by conversation)            |  344.00 | 48.66 | 312.00 | 400.00 |
| cleaning retention rate (by conversation)     |    0.68 |  0.04 |   0.64 |   0.73 |
| morphemes-per-word (by conversation)          |    1.00 |  0.00 |   1.00 |   1.00 |
| letters-per-word (by conversation)            |    4.22 |  0.14 |   4.12 |   4.38 |
| lexical frequency lg10 (by conversation)      |    3.67 |  0.18 |   3.48 |   3.84 |

<br> <br>

# News and Getting Help

For bugs, feature requests, and general questions, reach out via one of
the following options: <br>
<ul style="list-style-type: none; padding-left: 0;">

<li>

<strong>Bugs/Features:</strong><br>[Open an
Issue](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/issues)
</li>

<li>

<strong>Questions:</strong><br>[Join
Discussion](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/SemanticDistance/discussions)
</li>

<li>

<strong>Urgent:</strong><br>Email <code><jamie.reilly@temple.edu></code>
</li>

</ul>

Commit message:

updated readme and index with technical considerations for loading data remotely from github

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

<br> <br>

# ConversationAlign

Open-source software for computing main effects and indices of alignment
across coversation partners in dyadic conversation transcripts. <br>

<div style="display: flex; gap: 10px; flex-wrap: wrap; margin-bottom: 15px;">

[![GitHub
release](https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign?color=blue&include_prereleases&label=Release)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/releases)
[![GitHub
stars](https://img.shields.io/github/stars/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign?style=social)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/stargazers)

[![Maintenance](https://img.shields.io/badge/Maintained%3F-yes-green.svg)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/graphs/commit-activity)
[![License: GPL
v3+](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-GPL%20v3+-blue.svg)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0)
[![R-CMD-check](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/actions/workflows/R-CMD-check.yaml)

</div>

<img src="man/figures/convo_demo.jpg" 
     alt="illustration of processing pipeline used by ConversationAlign" 
     style="float: right; width: 50%; margin-left: 20px; margin-bottom: 10px;" />

# Overview

`ConversationAlign` analyzes alignment and computes main effects across
more than 40 unique dimensions between interlocutors (conversation
partners) engaged in two-person conversations. ConversationAlign
transforms raw language data into simultaneous time series objects
across \>40 possible dimensions via an embedded lookup database. There
are a number of issues you should consider and steps you should take to
prepare your data. <br> <br>

# Installation and Technical Considerations

One of the main features of the `ConversationAlign` algorithm involves
yoking norms for many different lexical, affective, and semantic
dimensions to each content word in your conversation transcripts of
interest. We accomplish this by joining your data to several large
lookup databases. These databases are too large to embed within
`ConversationAlign`. When you load `ConversationAlign`, all of these
databases should automatically download and load from an external
repository `ConversationAlign_Data`. `ConversationAlign` needs these
data, so you will need a decent internet connection to load the package.
Install the development version of ConversationAlign from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) using the `devtools` package.

``` r
# Check if devtools is installed, if not install it
if (!require("devtools", quietly = TRUE)) {
  install.packages("devtools")
}

# Load devtools
library(devtools)

# Check if ConversationAlign is installed, if not install from GitHub
if (!require("ConversationAlign", quietly = TRUE)) {
  devtools::install_github("Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign")
}

# Load SemanticDistance
library(ConversationAlign)
```

# Step 1: Read and Format Transcript Options

## `read_dyads()`

- Reads transcripts from a local drive or directory of your choice.
- Store each of your individual conversation transcripts (`.csv`,
  `.txt`, `.ai`) that you wish to concatenate into a corpus in a folder.
  `ConversationAlign` will search for a folder called `my_transcripts`
  in the same directory as your script. However, feel free to name your
  folder anything you like. You can specify a custom path as an argument
  to `read_dyads()`
- Each transcript must nominally contain two columns of data
  (Participant and Text). All other columns (e.g., meta-data) will be
  retained.

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `read_dyads`:</span> <br>

- `my_path` default is ‘my_transcripts’, change path to your folder
  name<br>

``` r
#will search for folder 'my_transcripts' in your current directory
MyConvos <- read_dyads()

#will scan custom folder called 'MyStuff' in your current directory, concatenating all files in that folder into a single dataframe
MyConvos2 <- read_dyads(my_path='/MyStuff')
```

<br>

## `read_1file()`

- Read single transcript already in R environment. We will use
  read_1file() to prep the Marc Maron and Terry Gross transcript. Look
  at how the column headers have changed and the object name
  (MaronGross_2013) is now the Event_ID (a document identifier), <br>

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `read_1file`:</span> <br>

- `my_dat` object already in your R environment containing text and
  speaker information.

``` r
MaryLittleLamb <- read_1file(MaronGross_2013)
#print first ten rows of header
knitr::kable(head(MaronGross_2013, 10), format = "pipe")
```

| speaker | text |
|:---|:---|
| MARON | I’m a little nervous but I’ve prepared I’ve written things on a piece of paper |
| MARON | I don’t know how you prepare I could ask you that - maybe I will But this is how I prepare - I panic |
| MARON | For a while |
| GROSS | Yeah |
| MARON | And then I scramble and then I type some things up and then I handwrite things that are hard to read So I can you know challenge myself on that level during the interview |
| GROSS | Being self-defeating is always a good part of preparation |
| MARON | What is? |
| GROSS | Being self-defeating |
| MARON | Yes |
| GROSS | Self-sabotage |

<br> <br>

# Step 2: Clean, Format, Align Norms

## `prep_dyads()`

-Cleans, formats, and vectorizes conversation transwcripts to a
one-word-per-row format -Yokes psycholinguistic norms for up to three
dimensions at a time (from \<40 possible dimensions) to each content
word. -Retains metadata

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `prep_dyads()`:</span> <br>

- `dat_read` name of the dataframe created during `read_dyads()` <br>
- `omit_stops` T/F (default=T) option to remove stopwords
- `lemmatize` T/F (default=T) lemmatize strings converting each entry to
  its dictionary form
- `which_stoplist` quoted argument specifying stopword list to apply,
  options include `none`, `MIT_stops`, `SMART_stops`,
  `CA_OriginalStops`, or `Temple_stops25`. Default is `Temple_stops25`.

``` r
NurseryRhymes_Prepped <- prep_dyads(dat_read=NurseryRhymes, lemmatize=TRUE, omit_stops=T, which_stoplist="Temple_stops25")
```

Example of a prepped dataset embedded as external data in the package
with ‘anger’ values yoked to each word.

``` r
knitr::kable(head(NurseryRhymes_Prepped, 10), format = "simple", digits=2)
```

| Event_ID | Participant_ID | Exchange_Count | Turn_Count | Text_Prep | Text_Clean | emo_anger |
|:---|:---|---:|---:|:---|:---|---:|
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | the | NA | NA |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | itsy | itsy | -0.02 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | bitsy | bitsy | -0.02 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | spider | spider | 0.04 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | climbed | climb | -0.09 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | up | up | -0.06 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | the | NA | NA |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | water | water | -0.17 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | 1 | 1 | spout | spout | 0.05 |
| ItsySpider | Maya | 1 | 2 | down | down | 0.03 |

<br> <br>

# Step 3: Summarize Data, Alignment Stats

## `summarize_dyads()`

This is the computational stage where the package generates a dataframe
boiled down to two rows per converation with summary data appended to
each level of Participant_ID. This returns the difference time series
AUC (dAUC) for every variable of interest you specified and the
correlation at lags -2,,0, 2. You decide whether you want a Pearson or
Spearman lagged correlation. <br>

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `summarize_dyads()`:</span> <br>

- `df_prep` dataframe created by `prep_dyads()` function
- `custom_lags` user specifies a custom set of turn-lags. Default is
  NULL with `ConversationAlign` producing correlations at a lead of 2
  turns, immediate response, and lag of 2 turns for each dimension of
  interest. <br>
- `sumdat_only` default is TRUE, produces grouped summary dataframe with
  averages by conversation and participant for each alignment dimension,
  FALSE retrains all of the original rows, filling down empty rows of
  summary statistics for the conversation (e.g., AUC)
- `corr_type` specifies correlation madel (parametric default =
  ‘Pearson’); other option ‘Spearman’ for computing turn-by-turn
  correlations across interlocutors for each dimension of interest.

``` r
MarySumDat <- summarize_dyads(df_prep = NurseryRhymes_Prepped, custom_lags=NULL, sumdat_only = TRUE, corr_type='Pearson') 
colnames(MarySumDat)
#>  [1] "Event_ID"           "Participant_ID"     "Dimension"         
#>  [4] "Dimension_Mean"     "AUC_raw"            "AUC_scaled100"     
#>  [7] "Talked_First"       "TurnCorr_Lead2"     "TurnCorr_Immediate"
#> [10] "TurnCorr_Lag2"
knitr::kable(head(MarySumDat, 10), format = "simple", digits = 3)
```

| Event_ID | Participant_ID | Dimension | Dimension_Mean | AUC_raw | AUC_scaled100 | Talked_First | TurnCorr_Lead2 | TurnCorr_Immediate | TurnCorr_Lag2 |
|:---|:---|:---|---:|---:|---:|:---|---:|---:|---:|
| ItsySpider | Maya | emo_anger | 0.001 | 0.783 | 1.630 | Maya | -1 | -1 | -1 |
| ItsySpider | Yin | emo_anger | -0.033 | 0.783 | 1.630 | Maya | -1 | -1 | -1 |
| JackJill | Ana | emo_anger | -0.066 | 3.729 | 4.662 | Ana | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| JackJill | Franklin | emo_anger | 0.030 | 3.729 | 4.662 | Ana | 1 | 1 | 1 |
| LittleLamb | Dave | emo_anger | -0.001 | 1.486 | 1.486 | Dave | NA | NA | NA |
| LittleLamb | Mary | emo_anger | -0.031 | 1.486 | 1.486 | Dave | NA | NA | NA |

# Optional: Generate corpus analytics

## `corpus_analytics()`

It is often critical to produce descriptives/summary statistics to
characterize your language sample. This is typically a laborious
process. `corpus_analytics` will do it for you, generating a near
publication ready table of analytics that you can easily export to the
specific journal format of your choice using any number of packages such
as `flextable` or `tinytable`.

### <span style="color: darkred;">Arguments to `corpus_analytics()`:</span>

- `dat_prep` dataframe created by `prep_dyads()`function <br>

``` r
NurseryRhymes_Analytics <-  corpus_analytics(dat_prep=NurseryRhymes_Prepped)
knitr::kable(head(NurseryRhymes_Analytics, 10), format = "simple", digits = 2)
```

| measure                                       |    mean | stdev |    min |    max |
|:----------------------------------------------|--------:|------:|-------:|-------:|
| total number of conversations                 |    3.00 |    NA |     NA |     NA |
| token count all conversations (raw)           | 1506.00 |    NA |     NA |     NA |
| token count all conversations (post-cleaning) | 1032.00 |    NA |     NA |     NA |
| exchange count (by conversation)              |   38.00 | 13.11 |  24.00 |  50.00 |
| word count raw (by conversation)              |  502.00 | 47.03 | 456.00 | 550.00 |
| word count clean (by conversation)            |  344.00 | 48.66 | 312.00 | 400.00 |
| cleaning retention rate (by conversation)     |    0.68 |  0.04 |   0.64 |   0.73 |
| morphemes-per-word (by conversation)          |    1.00 |  0.00 |   1.00 |   1.00 |
| letters-per-word (by conversation)            |    4.22 |  0.14 |   4.12 |   4.38 |
| lexical frequency lg10 (by conversation)      |    3.67 |  0.18 |   3.48 |   3.84 |

<br> <br>

# News and Getting Help

For bugs, feature requests, and general questions, reach out via one of
the following options: <br>
<ul style="list-style-type: none; padding-left: 0;">

<li>

<strong>Bugs/Features:</strong><br>[Open an
Issue](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/ConversationAlign/issues)
</li>

<li>

<strong>Questions:</strong><br>[Join
Discussion](https://github.com/Reilly-ConceptsCognitionLab/SemanticDistance/discussions)
</li>

<li>

<strong>Urgent:</strong><br>Email <code><jamie.reilly@temple.edu></code>
</li>

</ul>
